---
title: A standard process to quarantine and restore IoT Devices
abbrev: MUD-Quaranatine
docname: draft-richardson-shg-un-quarantine-02

# stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
area: Internet
wg: RIPE IoT Working Group
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: bcp
stand-alone: yes

coding: us-ascii
pi:    # can use array (if all yes) or hash here
#  - toc
#  - sortrefs
#  - symrefs
  toc: yes
  sortrefs:   # defaults to yes
  symrefs: yes

author:
    - ins: M. Richardson
      name: Michael Richardson
      org: Sandelman Software Works
      email: mcr+ietf@sandelman.ca

    - ins: J. Latour
      name: Jacques Latour
      org: CIRA Labs
      email: Jacques.Latour@cira.ca

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC7710:
  RFC8520:
  I-D.ietf-capport-architecture:
  I-D.ietf-capport-api:

informative:
  I-D.ietf-teep-architecture:
  dpp:
    title: "Device Provisioning Protocol Specification"
    format:
      pdf: https://github.com/kcdtv/wpa3/blob/master/Device_Provisioning_Protocol_Specification_v1.0.pdf
    target: "https://www.wi-fi.org/downloads-registered-guest/Device_Provisioning_Protocol_Draft_Technical_Specification_Package_v0_0_23_0.zip/31255"
  I-D.richardson-shg-mud-quarantined-access:
  I-D.ietf-anima-bootstrapping-keyinfra:
  SecureHomeGateway:
    title: "CIRALabs Secure Home Gateway"
    format:
      pdf: https://github.com/CIRALabs/Secure-IoT-Home-Gateway/blob/master/CIRA%20Labs%20-%20Secure%20Home%20Gateway%20Project%202018-09.pdf
    target: "https://github.com/CIRALabs/"
  swatting:
    target: "https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/swatting"
    title: "Cambridge English Dictionary: swatting"
    date: January 2019
  looneytunes:
    target: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Looney_Tunes_and_Merrie_Melodies_characters
    title: List of Looney Tunes Cartoons

--- abstract

The Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD) is a tool to describe the limited access
that a single function device such as an Internet of Things device might
need.  The enforcement of the access control lists described protects the
device from attacks from the Internet, and protects the Internets from
compromised devices.

This document details the process which occurs when a device is detected to
have violated the stated policy.  The goal of these steps is to ensure that
the device is correctly removed from operation, fixed, and if possible,
restored to safe operation.

--- middle

# Introduction        {#problems}

{{RFC8520}} describes the format of the Manufacturer Usage
Description (MUD) files.  MUD files provide a set of network Access Control
Lists (ACL, pronounced \[ak-uhl\]) that describes the expected traffic from
a device, such as an Internet of Things (IoT) device.

MUD files are used in a number of projects, including the CIRALabs'
{{SecureHomeGateway}} (SHG) project.  In this project a home gateway
("router") is enhanced to be able to use MUD files to describe the traffic
expected from all connected devices.   If a device does not have a MUD
format description, then the project can provide a broad set of traffic
expectations based upon categorization of the device by the home owner.

This document is about the process to be followed when a device is observed
to be violating the ACLs applied to it.  While this document will identify
network protocols (and gaps where no protocol exists) as appropriate, the
goal of this document is more about the human process. Specifically, who gets
called, and in what order.  Who makes each call, and how are they identified.

In addition, what kind of data needs to be shared among the parties and what
are the privacy and human rights implications of sharing the required data.

Finally, in the security considerations section of this document some
concerns about prevention of so-called "SWAT"ing ({swatting}), where an
attempt might be made to take a location or network offline through phony
reports.

## Terminology          {#Terminology}

This document is not a protocol specification, but rather a Best Current
Practices in the area of human operations.  While this is sometimes called a
"Standard Operating Proceedure" (SOP), this document should not be
considered the actual SOP for an organization, but rather be referrenced.

The terminology {{RFC2119}} the key words such as "MUST", "MUST NOT",
"REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119.
In the context of this human protocol, they do not describe network protocol
interoperability requirements, but rather constraints upon how the humans
need to operate in order to avoid unsafe situations.

The following terms are used in this document:

* owner's network: the network belonging to the owner of the device.  In
  residentical situations, this is typically the home owner.  In commercial
  environments, this may be the owner of the building, or the commercial
  tenant in the building.

* tenant: one or more people who occupy a space in which a network of devices
  exists which do not belong directly to them.

## An overview of the stages of activity

This section provides a brief overview of the states that a device may be in.
The following section provides a detailed description of the state.
This document is primarily about how a device transitions from one state to
another, which is covered in {#transitions}.

<figure>
INSERT_TEXT_FROM_FILE states.txt END
          <postamble>Figure 1: Device Connectivity States</postamble>
</figure>

* new device: a device that has just been "connected" to the network.

* nominal: a device which is operating correctly.

* suspicious: a device which has once gone out of it's MUD profile.

* suspect: a device which has repeatedly gone out of it's MUD profile.

* device-of-interest: a device that is part of a class of devices which is
  considered suspect.

* quarantined: a device which has been isolated into a network "segment", it
  may stil be operating locally.

* disabled: a device which has been disconnected from the network, and has
  also had mains power removed.  The device is believed to be off.

* upgrading: a device which is active for the purpose of having new firmware installed.

* returning-to-service: a device which has new firmware, and is going through
  a re-enrollment process.  It may still lack critical configuration, and may
  be unable to yet perform critical functions.

* p0wned: a device which is known to have malicious routines
  running, but is still connected to the network.  It may continue to provide
  the services the device was designed to do, in additional to performing
  functions controlled by an unauthorized entity.


# Detailed description of states  {#states}

A device is considered to be on one of the above states.  The device is not
considered to be aware of it's state, rather this is a characteristic that
the network assigns to the device.

## New device

A device newly installed will have no initial network connectivity.  It will
be awaiting some kind of enrollment or onboarding process.  Examples of
enrollment processes include {{I-D.ietf-anima-bootstrapping-keyinfra}},
{{dpp}}, processes defined by The Thread Group and Apple Homekit, as well as
a great number of custom and proprietary methods.

In many cases the device may provide limited network connectivity (such as by
running as an Access Point), and can be reached by attackers.  The owner of
the device may in fact in unaware that the device is "smart", and it may be
possible for a device to become compromised without ever having joined a
network.   This case is particularly difficult, as having never joined a
network, the device will not emit signals on the owner's network that can
be detected to notice that the device has been attacked.  Also, having never
been connected, the device is more likely to have old firmware.

## Nominal

The device is operating normally and is not suspected to be corrupted or
under attack.

### Use of Captive Portal API

In preperation for possible quarantine, the DHCP and RA options defined
in {{RFC7710}} and referenced by {{I-D.ietf-capport-architecture}} (section
2.2.1) SHOULD be recorded if present for later use.

An additional captive portal API key "quarantine", if having the
true value indicates that the device is not connected
to the Internet for security reasons.  The existing key "captive"
({{I-D.ietf-capport-api}} section 4.2) SHOULD also be checked, as the
device MAY be subject to a captive portal.

Based upon policy, it is appropriate for a MUD controller to put a new device
into a captive portal state until such time as inclusion into the operational
part of the network has been approved by a human operator.  The state should
be "captive", but not "quarantined".

## Suspicious

The device and/or the Internet has attempted a connection which is forbidden
by the MUD file.  This activity is notable, but particularly in the case
where a MUD file was generated by a third party (such as by a period of
observation), it may signal that the MUD file is inaccurate rather than that
the device is compromised.

In the case of connections that originate from the Internet to the device
which are forbidden, this may indicate that device is being scanned for,
but that the security features of the router are resisting the attack.

It is unclear how a device is returned from suspicious state to nominal.
A reasonable process might be that after a period of time in which no new
unwanted activity occurs it is returned.  A clear indication that it should
return to nomimal is if a new MUD file is applied to the device.

## Suspect

The device is repeatedly attempting to connect to core infrastructure which
it has reasonably no reason to connect to.  Examples of this would include
connecting to many IP addresses in a sequential or high-frequency rate,
connecting to well-known ports not intended to for end devices (for instance
TCP port 22, 23, 25).  There might still be a reasonable explanation for this
behaviour, including that the "inside" IP address has been reassigned to a
different device (such as desktop computer).

IPFIX is a candidate protocol for a MUD controller to inform an ISP about

## Device of Interest

A device has become interesting based upon two possible situations: an
internal signal that a device has become suspected, and based upon external
indications that there are active threats against the device.  A device in
this state SHOULD go into quarantine upon the next observed attack.

If it can be observed that there are DNS spoofing attempts against the
device manufacturer's firmware repository, or it's command/control channel
(for devices which have cloud connections), then it would be reasonable to
become interested in the device: an attack may be coming.

A device under interest would continue to be able to perform it's normal
functions.   For instance, a furnace would continue to heat the house,
and would continue to report it's statistics to it's
manufacturer/service-entity, and would continue to respond to thermostat changes.

## Quarantined

A device in quarantine gets no Internet access.

Devices in quarantine MAY use the API defined by
{{I-D.ietf-capport-architecture}} to determine if the device has been
quarantined.  Devices which can display this information visually SHOULD do
so, such as on a status LCD display, or by a unique color scheme for status
LEDs.

A device in quarantine MAY do DNS requests to the local recursive DNS
resolvers for the IP address of it's firmware repository.  This address would
be present in the device's MUD file using the {{I-D.richardson-shg-mud-quarantined-access}}.
Access to the firmware repository is important to permit the device to apply
new firmware and/or reset itself to factory default.

A device in quarantine that performs other functions might continue to be
perform those functions.  For instance, a fridge would remain cold, but it
would not respond to thermostat changes, or communicate with a grocery store.

## Disabled

A device that is disabled gets no network connectivity at all, including no
local network connectivity.

A device that is directly mains powered would be disconnected by a human.
A device that is powered by Power-over-Ethernet could be disconnected by
administratively turning power off on that port.

A device that is battery powered or scavanges power would remain on as long
as it had power.

## Returning to Service

A device that is attempting to return to service has installed some "fix" for
the issue that lead it to be quarantined.  It could also be the case that the
device did not need to anything, and that the quarantine was a false
positive, and a new MUD file is loaded with the additionally accepted
patterns.

A device returning to service MAY have erased all it's network settings, and
will have to go through some form of network enrollment again.

## Owned by malicious entity ("p0wned")

A device which is known to be controlled by a malicious entity.  It may be
impossible to quarantine the device if it performs some critical function and
the imposition of quarantine would prevent that.

# Detailed description of transitions {#transitions}

This section deals with the transitions between states.  These transitions
occur as a result of network and/or human signaling.  The occurance of these
transitions will in most cases cause a signal to be sent.

## Initial Enrollment

The process of enrollment is out of scope for this document.

## Re-enrollment

The process of re-enrollment is out of scope for this document.  This
document does specify when this re-enrollment can take place, and how a human
can indicate to a device and to the network infrastructure that re-enrollment
can take place.

Re-enrollment can occur a number of different ways.

### factory-default re-enrollment

A device can re-enroll in a factory-default state.
This means that all settings are lost and any private keys that might have
been visible to malicious code/coders who may have had access to the device
have are regenerated.

Devices that store private keys in Trusted Platform Modules (TPM), or in
Trusted Execution Environments (see {{I-D.ietf-teep-architecture}}) could
reasonably assume that private keys may be retained.  From an 802.1AR
perspective, the IDevID may be assumed to be intact, but the integrity of the
LDevID may be suspect.

As the device is in a factory-default state it will have no
user/owner-specific configuration, and any authorization lists will need to
be re-established!

### simple re-enrollment

The device does not return to a factory-default state, and has existing
network, owner credentials and configuration intact.  A network onboarding
will need to be repeated to establish new per-device network keys.

An audit of the device authorizations SHOULD be done, as an attacker may have
inserted additional authorizations in order to return.

### other kinds?

Are there states in between these two extremes?

## Initial suspicion

The transition from nomimal to initial suspicion occurs when the MUD firewall
detects (and blocks) network not described in the device MUD.  There are a
number of non-critical reasons why this could occur.

The mostly likely situation is that the MUD describes access rules using DNS
names, while the firewall is implemented in terms of IP addresses. The name
to IP mapping may well have changed, and the firewall has not yet caught up
to the new mapping.





## Confirmed suspicion

TBD

## Device identified as attack target

TBD

## Suspension of connectivity

TBD

## Re-Installation of valid firmware

TBD

# An example process

Here will be somes examples of a device.

# Human Rights Considerations

TBD

# Privacy Considerations

TBD

# Security Considerations

TBD

# IANA Considerations

## Captive Portal API JSON keys

A new JSON key for {{I-D.ietf-capport-api}}'s "Captive Portal API Keys"
is to be registred with the following values:

    key:  "quarantine"
    type: "boolean"
    description:  [THISDOCUMENT] specifies that the quarantine key should be
                  marked true if the device has had its Internet access
                  revoked due to violation of an RFF8520 (MUD) profile.

# Acknowledgements

--- back

